---
layout: page
title: 
permalink: /annotations/
---

## Annotated Bibliography

Albrecht, R., & Baron, S. (2002). The politics of pedagogy: expectations and reality for information literacy in librarianship. *Journal of Library Administration*, 36 (1-2), 71–96. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J111v36n01_06](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J111v36n01_06)

> In this article, Albrecht and Baron (2002) emphasize the need for instructional and information literacy skills in academic libraries based on the evaluation of employment needs, following ACRL literacy standards and graduate student preparedness for meeting information literacy standards in the academic workplace. A survey and assessment of 49 School of Library and Information Science (SLIS) programs from U.S universities was conducted to compare the number of instructional courses that focused on pedological training. Albrecht and Baron (2002) note that despite 50% of an academic librarian’s time involves information literacy training to staff and students, most of the 49 SLIS programs offer instructional courses as an elective, instead of mandatory. Albrecht and Baron (2002) argue that graduates are ill prepared for the academic library workforce with more than 60% learning on the job without a solid understanding of the ACRL information literacy standards. *- Janie Hill*

Badke, W. (2011). Why information literacy is invisible. *Communications In Information Literacy*, (4)2, 129-141. Retrieved from [http://www.comminfolit.org/index.php?journal=cil&page=article&op=view&path%5B%5D=Vol4-2010PER3&path%5B%5D=119](http://www.comminfolit.org/index.php?journal=cil&page=article&op=view&path%5B%5D=Vol4-2010PER3&path%5B%5D=119)

> Badke (2010) argues that the concept of information literacy (IL) remains something of an enigma within academia. The reasons for this are plenty, but the most pressing issue according to the author is that both the nature and challenge of IL has been misunderstood and underestimated by academic faculty and administrators alike. As a result, IL has assumed the status of a remedial topic that does not require significant instruction rather than a valuable and relevant subject of study that will help students function in the information society and knowledge-based economy of the twenty-first century. Badke (2010) concludes that in order to lift the veil of invisibility that shrouds IL's place in higher education, more people have to recognize the “the need for skills to link the right information to the right situation” (p. 139). *- Adam Walser*

Bradley, C.  (2013).  Information literacy policy development in Canada: Is it time?  *Partnership, the Canadian Journal of Library and Information Practice and Research*, 8(2), 1-28. [http://dx.doi.org/10.21083/partnership.v8i2.2489](http://dx.doi.org/10.21083/partnership.v8i2.2489) 

> Bradley’s research approaches the conundrum of Canadian information literacy policy from the framework provided in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights article 19, suggesting that IL is an essential human right. She defines IL using the ACRL and ALA’s definitions, and gives an overview of policy in the UK and Australia. She explains the importance of IL, highlighting the amount and complexity of information in circulation as primary. Bradley suggests that personal, economic, social, and civic outcomes are all improved with ILE, using the Idle No More movement as a case study. Further, she emphasizes the urgent need for earlier, more comprehensive ILE across the country. Ultimately, Bradley shows Canada as lagging behind in both ILE and policy development. *- Mary Greenshields*

Cambre, C. & Arshad-Ayaz, A. (2017). Literacies future past: Inwardness as ethical information. In Samek, T. & Shultz, L. (Eds.), *Information ethics and global citizenship*, (pp. 64-79). Jefferson, NC: McFarland Publishers.  

> Cambre and Arshad-Ayaz address the importance of considering ethics in the discussion of literacy.  They assert, as do many others authors on the topic of information literacy in Canada, that we are lacking in terms of information literacy education (ILE). Further, they posit that ILE has a duty to consider ethics in the delivery of learning. Information is not neutral but neither is the delivery of information; Cambre and Arshad-Ayaz discuss the importance of including other knowledges, especially Indigenous, in the conversation to challenge hegemonic epistemology and enact de Sousa’s (2007) call for the “decolonization of knowledge”. The authors highlight the importance of the *process* of creating, digesting, structuring, and using information, because performance makes meaning, and insist, as does Bradley (2013) that the term “*literacies*” be adopted to indicate the plurality of the concept. *- Mary Greenshields*

Farkas, M. (2012). Participatory technologies, pedagogy 2.0 and information literacy. *Library Hi Tech*, 30(1), 82-94.  [https://doi.org/10.1108/07378831211213229](https://doi.org/10.1108/07378831211213229)

> In this article Farkas (2012) looks at the impact that participatory technologies have had on learning and the “information environment.”  She describes how knowledge is changing quickly and learning is a “continuous lifelong endeavour” (p. 3).  Farkas states that librarians have already been transitioning to a role of teaching information literacy skills which are important for because of the constant change of information and information tools.  Farkas believes that librarians are well situated to guide learners through information and participatory technologies by using their information literacy teaching skills and applying them with updated pedagogy to make sure that it is relevant and effective. *- Colin Elliot*

Jacobs, H. L. & Berg, S. (2011). Reconnecting information literacy policy with the core values of librarianship. *Library Trends*, 60(2), 383-394. [https://dx.doi.org/10.1353/lib.2011.0043](https://dx.doi.org/10.1353/lib.2011.0043)

> Jacobs and Berg (2011) highlight the important role librarians can play in helping create an informed and educated citizenry who can meet the challenges of the twenty-first century through a broader conception of information literacy (IL). In particular, the authors argue that the Core Values of Librarianship (2004), as outlined by the American Library Association (ALA), be used as the foundation for the development of IL policy. Jacobs and Berg (2011) suggest that by using this statement as a lens through which to view IL work, and considering IL as a difficult or demanding question that requires critical co-investigation by librarians and students rather than as a problem that needs to be solved by the former, the ambitious social and political goals of the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) Alexandria Proclamation (2005) can be achieved. *- Adam Walser*

Shank, J. D., & Bell, S. (2011). Blended librarianship. *Reference & User Services Quarterly*, 51(2), 105-110. Retrieved from [https://journals.ala.org/rusq/article/download/4025/4567](https://journals.ala.org/rusq/article/download/4025/4567)

> Shank & Bell (2011) discuss the concept of blended librarianship and how it is an essential change that librarians must make to meet today’s informational challenges.  They write that “librarians can and should be integral, educational partners as well as a catalyst for students’ knowledge enrichment and intellectual inquiry guides blended librarianship” (2011).  In order to make this shift and not only remain relevant, but strengthen the role of librarians, Shank & Bell believe that librarians need to teach students the tools and strategies to use information (information literacy).  Combining these skills with course design and delivery will allow librarians to have a significant impact on today’s learners. *- Colin Elliot*

Sturges, P., and Gastinger, A. (2010). Information literacy as a human right. *Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Information Services*, 60(3), 195-202. [https://doi.org/10.1515/libr.2010.017](https://doi.org/10.1515/libr.2010.017)

> In this article, Sturges and Gastinger (2010) say that a fundamental argument for information literacy as human right can be derived from Article Nineteen of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article Nineteen states that everyone has a right to access information, which includes the right to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas (Sturges & Gastinger, 2010). The article serves as inspiration for the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) on the premise that information literacy promotes social inclusion. Sturges and Gastinger (2010) argue that the Freedom of Access to Information and Freedom of Expression (FAIFE) workshops and programs, which focus on internet access and public access to health information are competency areas that librarians need to utilize in information literacy instruction to empower the public by helping people understand and interpret the information they will encounter. However, a major point in developing international information literacy programs is that librarians need to determine the public needs by focusing on practical settings such as, live, work, study, and leisure. *- Janie Hill*
